
.TH ip6tables-optimizer 8 "February 2015" "Johannes Hubertz" " "

.SH NAME
ip6tables-optimizer \- optimize ip6tables filter-chains in kernel depending on their usage counters

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ip6tables-optimizer [-a] [-c] [-h] [-v[v]] [-w]
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ip6tables-optimizer
is used to sort ip6tables-rules in relation to the values of their
packet-counters. And of course, administrators artwork is untouched.
Sorting only happens in consecutive blocks of accept or drop
statements, never across their borders. Therefore these blocks are
called partitions and so they behave.

ip6tables-optimizer is shipped in three files, a shell wrapper,
functions to be sourced from it and a python exec. The sourced
functions were neccessary because of testing them with
.B shunit2,
thanks to Karen Ward for this wonderful tool. The wrapper is my tribute
to the changing function of python subprocess in different default
python versions over some Debian releases.

It runs in four steps, working directory is /var/run, id=0 is
neccessary:

.B 1.) /var/cache/ip6tables-optimizer/auto-apply6
is checked for read and exec flags. If so, the file is used as
input on running ip6tables-restore, afterwards it is renamed. The 
renaming follows up a simple datetime strategy, this action is 
logged as well. Thats my way of firing new rules into the machine.
They are copied using scp and after that marked as executable 
with chmod through ssh.

.B 2) ip6tables-save -t filter -c > ip6tables-optimizer-save-output 2>ip6tables-optimizer-save-errors

.B 3) ip6tables_optimizer.py ip6tables-optimizer-save-output >ip6tables-optimizer-output 2>ip6tables-optimizer-partitions

.B 4) ip6tables-restore [ -c ] ip6tables-optimizer-output >ip6tables-optimizer-restore-out 2>ip6tables-optimizer-restore-err

Of course, you might want to run it by cron every now and then.

.SH "OPTIONS"
.IP -a
If given, it prevents the ip6tables-optimizer from handling the file
.B /var/cache/ip6tables-optimizer/auto-apply6

.IP -c
This option will prevent ip6tables-optimizer to reset paket/byte
counters on restoring the tables, i.e these counters will be reloaded
with the sorted rules. Intention is to support long term debugging
sessions, because the position of the rules to be obeyed will be more
stable.

.IP -h
Shows a brief help message about valid optional arguments and exits 1

.IP -v
Verbose logging, i.e. reporting the steps and the number of rules. If given twice, the number of moves and the partitions as well.

.IP -w
reports INPUT and OUTPUT chain only, useful on non forwarding machines.

.SH "FILES"
.B /var/cache/ip6tables-optimizer
keeps all the new rulesets, incomig new
.B auto-apply6
is renamed to f.e. 
.B auto-apply6-20140818-091958
and kept there. Feel free to clean up these files or keep them as you like it.

.B /var/run
keeps the temporary files, their names all are beginning with
.B ip6tables-optimizer-

.SH "LOG"
The handling of an executable file
.B auto-apply6
is reported always. At least start and end of every program run
is reported via syslog. Single verbose flag shows the three steps
and the corresponding number of ip6tables commands. Two verbose flags
additionally will show up the count of moves and the partitions of
the chains.

.SH "EXIT STATUS"
ip6tables-optimizer usually returns a value of 0. Accidentially in
case of error, f.e. if the ip6tables-restore fails, it returns the
triggering error.

.SH "COMPATIBILITY"
ip6tables-optimizer
.B should
be compatible to any ip6tables implementations out in the wild. If not,
keep me informed, thanks. I'll do my very best.

.SH "HISTORY"
ip6tables-optimizer has grown from first ideas over some more than two
years and many errors to a productive state. First tries to use
subproces within the python soon led into problems using different
python versions on different debian releases. So these tasks were done
on shell level, python testing and shell testing improved the
solution.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ip6tables (8)
.BR ip6tables-save (8)
.BR ip6tables-restore (8)

.SH "LICENSE"
GNU General Public License version 3 or any newer version applies to
ip6tables-optimizer.

.SH "AUTHOR"
Johannes Hubertz <johannes@hubertz.de> wrote this in 2012 - 2016.
Anytime comments are welcome.

